<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Table of Contents</title>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<nav epub:type="toc">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Table of Contents</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<a href="text/titlepage.xhtml">Titlepage</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/imprint.xhtml">Imprint</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/conspectus.xhtml">Conspectus</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/preface.xhtml">Preface</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/halftitle.xhtml">Halftitle</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>: The End</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c1">1. In all he does man seeks some good as end or means</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c2">2. <em>The</em> end is <em>the</em> good; our subject is this and its science, Politics</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c3">3. Exactness not permitted by subject, nor to be expected by student, who needs experience and training</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c4">4. Men agree that the good is happiness, but differ as to what this is. We must reason from facts accepted without question by the man of trained character</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c5">5. The good cannot be pleasure, as some hold, nor honour, nor virtue</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c6">6. Various arguments to show against the Platonists that there cannot be one universal good: even if there were it would not help us here</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c7">7. The good is the final end, and happiness is this. To find it we ask, What is man’s function? Resulting definition of happiness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c8">8. This view harmonizes various current views</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c9">9. Is happiness acquired, or the gift of Gods or chance?</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c10">10. Can no man be called happy during life?</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c11">11. Cannot the fortunes of survivors affect the dead?</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c12">12. Happiness as absolute end is above praise</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml#c13">13. Division of the faculties and resulting division of the virtues</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>: Moral Virtue</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c1">1. Moral virtue is acquired by the repetition of the corresponding acts</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c2">2. These acts must be such as reason prescribes; they cannot be defined exactly, but must be neither too much nor too little</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c3">3. Virtue is in various ways concerned with pleasure and pain</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c4">4. The conditions of virtuous action as distinct from artistic production</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c5">5. Virtue not an emotion, nor a faculty, but a trained faculty or habit</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c6">6. <abbr>Viz.</abbr> the habit of choosing the mean</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c7">7. This must be applied to the several virtues</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c8">8. The two vicious extremes are opposed to one another and to the intermediate virtue</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-2.xhtml#c9">9. The mean is hard to hit, and is a matter of perception not of reasoning</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>: The Will / The Several Moral Virtues and Vices</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c1">1. An act is involuntary when done (a) under compulsion, or (b) through ignorance: (a) means not originated by doer, (b) means through ignorance of the circumstances: voluntary, then, means originated with knowledge of circumstances</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c2">2. Purpose, a mode of will, means choice after deliberation</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c3">3. We deliberate on what we can do⁠–⁠not on ends, but means</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c4">4. We wish for the end, the real or apparent good</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c5">5. Virtue and vice are alike voluntary: our acts are our own; for we are punished for them: ignorance is no excuse when due to negligence: if this be our character, we have made it by repeated acts: even bodily vices are blamable when thus formed. We cannot plead that our notion of good depends on our nature; for (1) vice would still be as voluntary as virtue, (2) we help to make ourselves what we are</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c6">6. Of courage and the opposite vices</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c7">7. Of courage⁠–⁠continued</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c8">8. Of courage improperly so called</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c9">9. How courage involves both pain and pleasure</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c10">10. Of temperance</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c11">11. Of temperance⁠–⁠continued</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-3.xhtml#c12">12. How profligacy is more voluntary than cowardice</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>: The Several Moral Virtues and Vices⁠–⁠Continued</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c1">1. Of liberality</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c2">2. Of magnificence</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c3">3. Of high-mindedness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c4">4. Of a similar virtue in smaller matters</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c5">5. Of gentleness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c6">6. Of agreeableness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c7">7. Of truthfulness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c8">8. Of wittiness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-4.xhtml#c9">9. Of the feeling of shame</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>: Justice</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c1">1. Preliminary. Two senses of justice distinguished. Of justice (1) = obedience to law, = complete virtue</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c2">2. Of justice (2) = fairness, how related to justice (1). What is just in distribution distinguished from what is just in correction</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c3">3. Of what is just in distribution, and its rule of geometrical proportion</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c4">4. Of what is just in correction, and its rule of arithmetical proportion</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c5">5. Simple requital is not identical with what is just, but proportionate requital is what is just in exchange; and this is effected by means of money. We can now give a general definition of justice (2)</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c6">6. (It is possible to act unjustly without being unjust.) That which is just in the strict sense is between citizens only, for it implies law</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c7">7. It is in part natural, in part conventional</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c8">8. The internal conditions of a just or unjust action, and of a just or unjust agent</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c9">9. Sundry questions about doing and suffering injustice</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c10">10. Of equity</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-5.xhtml#c11">11. Can a man wrong himself?</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>: The Intellectual Virtues</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c1">1. Must be studied because (a) reason prescribes the mean, (b) they are a part of human excellence. The intellect is (1) scientific, (2) calculative: we want the virtue of each</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c2">2. The function of the intellect, both in practice and speculation, is to attain truth</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c3">3. Of the five modes of attaining truth: (1) of demonstrative science of things unalterable</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c4">4. Of knowledge of things alterable, <abbr>viz.</abbr> (2) of art in wht we make</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c5">5. And (3) of prudence in what we do, the virtue of the calculative intellect</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c6">6. (4) Of intuitive reason as the basis of demonstrative science</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c7">7. (5) Of wisdom as the union of science and intuitive reason. Comparison of the two intellectual virtues, wisdom and prudence</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c8">8. Prudence compared with statesmanship and other forms of knowledge</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c9">9. Of deliberation</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c10">10. Of intelligence</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c11">11. Of judgment. Of reason or intuitive perception as the basis of the practical intellect</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c12">12. Of the uses of wisdom and prudence. How prudence is related to cleverness</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-6.xhtml#c13">13. How prudence is related to moral virtue</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>: Characters Other Than Virtue and Vice / Pleasure</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c1">1. Of continence and incontinence, heroic virtue and brutality. Of method. Statement of opinions about continence</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c2">2. Statement of difficulties as to how one can know right and do wrong</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c3">3. Solution: to know has many senses; in what sense such a man knows</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c4">4. Of incontinence in the strict and in the metaphorical sense</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c5">5. Of incontinence in respect of brutal or morbid appetites</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c6">6. Incontinence in anger less blamed than in appetite</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c7">7. Incontinence yields to pleasure, softness to pain. Two kinds of incontinence, the hasty and the weak</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c8">8. Incontinence compared with vice and virtue</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c9">9. Continence and incontinence not identical with keeping and breaking a resolution</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c10">10. Prudence is not, but cleverness is, compatible with incontinence</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c11">11. We must now discuss pleasure. Opinions about it</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c12">12. Answers to arguments against goodness of pleasure. Ambiguity of good and pleasant. Pleasure not a transition, but unimpeded activity</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c13">13. Pleasure is good, and the pleasure that consists in the highest activity is <em>the</em> good. All admit that happiness is pleasant. Bodily pleasures not the only pleasures</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-7.xhtml#c14">14. Of the bodily pleasures, and the distinction between naturally and accidentally pleasant</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>: Friendship or Love</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c1">1. Uses of friendship. Differences of opinion about it</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c2">2. Three motives of friendship. Friendship defined</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c3">3. Three kinds of friendship corresponding to the three motives. Perfect friendship is that whose motive is the good</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c4">4. The others are imperfect copies of this</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c5">5. Intercourse necessary to the maintenance of friendship</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c6">6. Impossible to have many true friends</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c7">7. Of friendship between unequal persons, and its rule of proportion. Limits within which this is possible</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c8">8. Of loving and being loved</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c9">9. Every society has its own form of friendship as of justice. All societies are summed up in civil society</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c10">10. Of the three forms of constitution</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c11">11. Of the corresponding forms of friendship</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c12">12. Of the friendship of kinsmen and comrades</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c13">13. Of the terms of interchange and quarrels hence arising in equal friendships</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-8.xhtml#c14">14. Of the same in unequal friendships</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>: Friendship or Love⁠—Continued</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c1">1. Of the rule of proportion in dissimilar friendships</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c2">2. Of the conflict of duties</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c3">3. Of the dissolution of friendships</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c4">4. A man’s relation to his friend like his relation to himself</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c5">5. Friendship and good-will</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c6">6. Friendship and unanimity</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c7">7. Why benefactors love more than they are loved</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c8">8. In what sense is it right to love one’s self</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c9">9. Why a happy man needs friends</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c10">10. Of the proper number of friends</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c11">11. Friends needed both in prosperity and adversity</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-9.xhtml#c12">12. Friendship is realized in living together</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>: Pleasure / Conclusion</a>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c1">1. Reasons for discussing pleasure</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c2">2. Arguments of Eudoxus that pleasure is the good</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c3">3. Argument that it is not a quality; that it is not determined; that it is a motion or coming into being. Pleasures differ in kind</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c4">4. Pleasure defined: its relation to activity</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c5">5. Pleasures differ according to the activities. The standard is the good man</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c6">6. Happiness not amusement, but life</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c7">7. Of the speculative life as happiness in the highest sense</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c8">8. Of the practical life as happiness in a lower sense, and of the relation between the two. Prosperity, how far needed</a>
						</li>
						<li>
							<a href="text/chapter-10.xhtml#c9">9. How is the end to be realized?</a>
						</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/endnotes.xhtml">Endnotes</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/colophon.xhtml">Colophon</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/uncopyright.xhtml">Uncopyright</a>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
		<nav epub:type="landmarks">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Landmarks</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<a href="text/titlepage.xhtml" epub:type="frontmatter titlepage">Titlepage</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/imprint.xhtml" epub:type="frontmatter imprint">Imprint</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/preface.xhtml" epub:type="frontmatter preface">Preface</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/chapter-1.xhtml" epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">The Nicomachean Ethics</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/endnotes.xhtml" epub:type="backmatter rearnotes">Endnotes</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/colophon.xhtml" epub:type="backmatter colophon">Colophon</a>
				</li>
				<li>
					<a href="text/uncopyright.xhtml" epub:type="backmatter copyright-page">Uncopyright</a>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
	</body>
</html>
